---
layout: post
title: Solving sudoku == Graph coloring ?
featured-img: sudoku.png
mathjax: true
---
# Solving sudoku == Graph coloring ?

## What is Graph Coloring?

A graph coloring is a coloring of the graph vertices such that no pair of adjacent vertices share the same color. You can read more about it [here](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/graph-coloring-applications/).

#### What is chromatic number?
The chromatic number of a graph G is the minimum number of colors needed to color the graph. You can read more about it [here](http://mathworld.wolfram.com/ChromaticNumber.html).

## How is solving a sudoku related to graph coloring?

Let us imagine the 81 squares present in a standard sudoku are the vertices of the graph. Each of these squares (or vertices) share an edge with the squares which are present in the same row, column or the 3x3 subgrid. The numbers from 1-9 can be visualized as 9 different colors. Thus, we can say that the chromatic number of a sudoku's graph is 9.

## My approach

First, let us see whether the graph is sparse or not.

Let us number the squares of the sudoku from left to right, row by row starting from 0. Subsequently, column one will be numbered 0, 9, 18, 27, 36 and so on ...

Consider another graph G with 81 vertices. Let us assume the graph G to be a complete graph i.e. every pair of distinct vertices is connected by a unique edge. Read more about complete graphs [here](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Complete_graph).
Since G is a complete graph, the number of edges can be calculated as follows:
            $ {81 \choose 2} $
This is equal to 3240.

Let us name our sudoku's graph S. Consider the vertex 0 (let us say the first vertex), it will have 8 row neighbours (here neighbours means the vertices adjacent to the vertex), 8 column neighbours and 4 more neighbours which are present in it's 3x3 subgid.
So, every row has 9 vertices and each of these 9 vertices are connected every other vetrex in the same row. This gives us:
            $ {9 \choose 2} $
edges. And there are 9 such rows so, total number of edges equal
            $ {9 \choose 2} \cdot 9 $
And similarly, every column has 9 vertices and each of these 9 vertices are connected to every other vertex in the same column. Now the total number of edges including both row edges and column edges give us
            $ {9 \choose 2} \cdot 9 \cdot 2 $
This is equal to 648.
Now each of the vertex in S is again connected to 4 more vertices in the 3x3 subgrid, so the total number of edges
            $ 4 \cdot 81 $
which is equal to 324.
Now, the total number of edges in graph S are
             648 + 324 = 972

Now, let us see how sparse is the graph. We divide the number of edges in graph S by the number of edges in graph G.
            $ \frac{972}{3240} = \frac{3}{10} $
So, the graph S is 30% of the full graph.

This shows us that using Adjacency List for the representation of graph S would be better. Read more about graph representation [here](https://www.geeksforgeeks.org/graph-and-its-representations/).

To check out my code (C++) visit [here](https://github.com/swastishreya/solvingSudoku_graphColoring).
